# Snowdrift Landscape Patterns: An Arctic Investigation

## Abstract

Between 2012 and 2018 we mapped the near-peak seasonal snow depths across two swaths totaling 126 km2 in Northern Alaska using aerial structure-from-motion photogrammetry and lidar surveys. These were validated by over a hundred thousand ground-based measurements. Using a quantitative method for identifying drift areas, we have produce a drift census that shows that on average 15% of the study area is covered by drifts each winter, with 40% of the snow-water-equivalent for the area contained in the drifts. Within the general census we identified six landscape-based classes of drifts, some of which fill each winter, others which do not, and identified distinct differences in drift type behavior largely explain by physiographic differences in the two swaths.  We tested year-to-year fidelity of drift patterns using four metrics from the field of image analysis, finding very high year-to-year similarities ranging from 77 to 83%, though there were significant differences between drift types. Our results are best explained by climatically convergent cumulative wind-blown snow fluxes interacting with drift traps that produce the same drifts despite considerable differences in winter weather. However, due to the existence of filling vs. non-filling drifts, and increasing rain-on-snow events in the Arctic, future snowdrift patterns in the Arctic may not mirror those of today.

## Introduction

Arctic snowdrifts are prominent landscape features that can extend for many kilometers and can be over 15 m deep. Over several decades of research (Benson, 1982; Benson and Sturm, 1993; Sturm and Wagner 2010; Sturm and Stuefer, 2013) it has been documented that these large drifts form reliably every winter, while summer imagery (Lauriol et al., 1986; Macander et al., 2015) shows that many of the drift persist through July before melting. Given their size, their recurrence, and the fact that the Arctic winter lasts 8-10 months of the year, we would suggest these drifts are essential components of the Arctic landscape, geomorphic features important in their own right.  Elsewhere, in the Rocky Mountains (Winstral et al., 2002; Hiemstra et al., 2006), in the Sierra Nevada (Kirchner et al., 2014), across the American and Canadian prairies (Pomeroy et al., 1993; Lapen and Martz, 1996), and in the high basins of the European Alps (Fohn and Meister, 1983; Schmidt 2009) and Spanish Pyrenees (Mases et al., 1998; Revuelto et al., 2014) similar large drifts form and are also long-lasting landscape features. We think these features deserve more scientific attention.

###### *Figure 1. Snow drifts on the North Slope of Alaska, May 25, 2019. The broad white areas are frozen lakes, largely snow-free. The sinuous white areas are ribbon drifts that formed in the lee of river cutbanks, lake edges, and bluffs. Here they range from several to more than 15 m deep, and from 0.5 to over 5 km in lineal extent.*

The impact of these large drifts, whether in the Arctic or elsewhere, extends well beyond the area covered by the drifts themselves. Conjugate scour zones form upwind and are the source of the additional snow for the drifts. These extensive scour zones, often several hundred meters wide and tens of kilometers long, serve important ecosystem functions for animals. For example they allow for easy travel and winter grazing for caribou (Pruitt, 1959). They also create trafficability problems for oil and gas exploration, which is performed in winter and requires sufficient snow to avoid damage to the underlying tundra (Felix and Raynolds, 1989; Sturm et al., 2019; Raynolds et al., 2020).

While it has been customary to treat snowdrifts and scour zones as areas of deeper (or shallower) than normal snow, known to produce more (or less) water for hydrologic run-off, little prior work on drifts as landscape features exists. Here we treat the drifts as quasi-permanent landscape structures, and consistent with that view, explore their geometry and distribution, just as one might for features such as cirques, tors, or nivation hollows. One rationale for taking this landscape perspective is that drifts are known to recur year after year in the same places and to take on similar forms each year, a phenomenon we call drift fidelity. We explore fidelity by comparing detailed multi-year snow depth maps from which we can derive show drift locations, sizes, and forms. The same maps allow us to produce a drift census (size, shape, type, setting), which documents that over 40% of the winter snow water equivalent (SWE) in our study area is stockpiled in drifts.  Since the study area is fairly typical of large areas of the Arctic, we can infer that drifts lock-up a sizeable fraction of the annual precipitation throughout much of the Arctic each year, re-affirming the importance of drifts in the regional hydrology.

Finally, we explore the sensitivity of the conjugate system of drifts and scour zones to a changing climate. While physically-linked by wind, this pattern segregates Arctic snow-water resources and related ecosystem services into zones that function in quite different ways. Snow run-off in scour zones, what little there is, occurs in spring when the ground is still frozen, limiting infiltration, while melt water from drifts is delayed until summer when the ground has thawed and infiltration can occur. In scour zones, high rates of sublimation (upwards of 40%) continue throughout the winter, but when blowing snow is stockpiled in a drift it is removed from the transport system and protected (Essery et al., 1999; see also Pomeroy et al., 1997; Liston and Sturm, 1998). This conservation function of snowdrifts has recently been observed in the Himalaya (Stigter et al., 2018), where a strong anti-correlation between the spatial distribution of sublimation intensity and the distribution of drifts was found. With such contrasting hydrological and ecological functioning, any change in the partitioning of the conjugate zones due to changes in wind and precipitation is likely to have large ramifications.

## Background

The connections between snow, wind transport, and topography, while well known, are still not fully understood, perhaps because the simplicity of the triadic relationship shown in Figure 2 masks surprising layers of complexity. For example, drift-available snow differs from the amount of snow actually present on the ground, which is simply the sum of winter precipitation (P) minus (or plus) transported snow (T), less sublimated snow (S). Available snow is controlled by vegetation (V), by wind shear stress, and by the spatial variability of snow adhesion. This latter property has proven difficult to measure or model because snow adhesion varies with grain characteristics and sintering, a temperature-dependent aging process that can be wildly heterogenous. It is not surprising, therefore, that prior studies have documented a 10X range in snow transport rates at any given wind speed (Sturm and Stuefer, 2013), a spread largely reflecting a wide range of surface snow conditions and therefore snow availability.

###### *Figure 2. The triadic relationship between snow availability, wind, and topography.*

The connection between wind transport and topography (gullies, river cutbanks, hillslopes, ridgelines, etc.) in principle is simpler: snow is deposited wherever the separation angle between wind streamlines and ground slope is sufficient to produce a local reduction in wind shear stress. But the finer details of this relationship are complicated by the turbulent nature of the wind when it blows over complex terrain. Eddies, rotors, and veering of the wind all take place. Local wind patterns are hard to measure, hard to visualize, and hard to model, yet they directly affect drift size and geometry. Additionally, as drifts grow and change through the winter, their form begins to affect the wind fields around them. One might say that the drifting snow never encounters the same landscape twice. Consistent with our landscape view of drifts, we might therefore invert the question of the linkage along this leg of the triad by asking: “What does the drift form and geometry tell us about the wind?”

Historically, the topography-drift connection has been studied using either a profile or a planimetric perspective. Engineers, faced with preventing railways and roads from being buried by drift (cf. Moore, 1922) sought optimal road cut profiles. Finney (1939), based on a combination of wind tunnel experiments and direct observations, concluded that for cuts steeper than 14° rotor eddies would form and deposit drifts that would clog the road. Rikhter (1954) and Kuz’min (1963) extended this work to more complex profiles, and the approach culminated when Tabler (1975) developed an empirical profile regression model based on up- and down-wind surface slopes. He introduced the term ‘equilibrium profile’ to describe the profile of a drift that cannot grow more because the topographic catchment has been filled, eradicating the separation angle necessary for deposition. Tabler’s equilibrium drifts are analogous to Cornish’s (1902) complete (vs. incomplete) drifts, and Sturm and Benson’s (1993) filling (vs. non-filling) drifts. Benson (1981), recognizing that prior to a drift being filled, it would capture all the blowing snow flux, began an annual series of surveys to monitor drift volume in NW Alaska that has been continued since then and is the longest drift size/profile record from the Arctic.

The planimetric (mapping) approach is newer and has been used to investigate the distribution of drifts at larger spatial scales. Kirnbaur (1991), Konig and Sturm (1998), Grayson et al., (2002), Winstral et al., (2002), and Parajka et al., (2012) all used aerial surveys to produce drift maps in plan view, seeking relationships between drifts and the underlying topography.  Klapa (1980), Lauriol et al. (1986), and Watson et al. (1994) used aerial photos to produce drift censuses, but lacking the ability to map drift depth, focused on changes in drift extent over time as climate indicators.  Drift fidelity, though not called by that name, has also been examined using planimetric mapping  in several studies (Luce and Tarboton 2004; Sturm and Wagner, 2010; Qualls and Arogundade, 2013).

Until now, uniting planimetric and profile approaches has been hampered by: (1) the lack of a quantitative definition of what constitutes a drift, (2) the lack of any way (other than laborious hand-probing) to obtain drift depth, and (3) the lack of automated algorithms to examine drift fidelity.  Here we propose a drift definition that we believe satisfies (1); airborne lidar and structure-from-motion (SfM) snow mapping techniques have solved issue (2), with such mapping now even possible using satellites (Shean et al., 2016), and  more robust computer methods for image comparison (see Chow and Paramesran, 2016) have largely solved issue (3).

## Field Areas

From 2012 through 2018 (except 2014) we used airborne SfM and lidar to map snow depth across two swaths (CLPX and HV) north of the Brooks Range in Alaska (Figure 3). Physiographically, these swaths span two types of terrain: (1) undulating, broad piedmont hills cut by abundant immature stream networks (i.e. water tracks), and (2) more rugged and rocky terrain with cliff bands (Table 1). Both swaths are tundra with shrub-tundra in riparian zones. The snow cover (excluding drifts) tends to be thin (< 0.6 m), comprised of six to ten layers, forms in September and lasts through May (see Benson and Sturm, 1993). Basal layers of depth hoar fill inter-tussock spaces and are typically capped by one or more wind slabs. Prevailing winter winds come from the south in the CLPX swath, and from the west in the HV swath. Drifts form in water tracks, along river and stream cutbanks, along the edges of inset lakes, and below outcrops of flat-lying or slightly dipping sedimentary rocks. Prior information on drifts in the area can be found in Evans et al., 1989; Sturm et al., 1995; Sturm et al., 2001; Walker et al., 2001; Liston and Sturm, 2002; Sturm and Stuefer, 2013).

###### *Figure 3: The study area in northern Alaska. The inset shows the location of the CLPX and HV swaths*


###### Table 1. CLPX and HV Physiography

|   | Slope: % of Area  |   |   |   |   | Mean Elevation    | Std. Dev. Elevation   | Total Area    |
|-------    |------------------ |---------  |---------  |---------  |------ |----------------   |---------------------  |------------   |
| Swath     | 0°-5°     | 5°- 10°   | 10°-15°   | 15°-30°   | >30°  |   |   |   |
| CLPX  | 70    | 23    | 4     | 2.7   | 0.3   | 862 m     | 53 m  | 97 km2    |
| HV    | 85    | 14    | 0.8   | 0.1   | 0.1   | 382 m     | 23 m  | 29 km2    |

## Snow Depth Mapping Methods
Snow depth mapping was done using airborne SfM photogrammetry (2015 though 2018) and lidar (2012 and 2013) and then adjusted to ground-based measurements (Figure 4). The area mapped each year was about 130 km2. To produce the maps, we: (1) conducted an airborne survey (snow-free) in June that was used to produce a snow-free digital elevation model (DEM) for each swath, (2) conducted multiple airborne surveys at near-peak snow cover each April that were used to create digital surface models (DSMs) of the snow cover, then (3) generated annual high resolution (1 m) snow depth maps by subtracting the snow-free DEM from the DSMs. Six such depth maps were produced for each swath between 2012 and 2018, comprising over 600 million individual geospatial snow depth records. The hardware, software, and processing steps used to go from the airborne survey data (photos or lidar returns) to snow depth maps is described in Johnson et al. (2013) and in Nolan et al. (2015).

###### *Figure 4: An example (from HV) of the snow mapping that forms the basis of this study. From left: a) the summer snow-free landscape, b) a topographic hillshade map, c) a snow depth map, and d-g) insets showing two (out of six) classes of drifts used in the drift census: (d and e): ice wedge drifts; (f and g): water track drifts.*

Acquiring the snow-free DEM required careful timing because tundra plants leaf out before all snowdrifts melt. We acquired an initial DEM using airborne lidar in 2012 and a second DEM using SfM in 2017. Both were acquired in early June, but in 2017 remnant snowdrifts covered some important parts of the field area. The 2017 DEM, however, was derived from a denser point cloud and therefore better quality where not obscured by snow. The two DEMs were ultimately fused together to leverage their respective strengths and make a single snow-free DEM.

The snow depth maps were field-validated and adjusted using 141,207 ground-based probe measurements collected concurrently with the airborne surveys. Differences between snow depth maps (raster data) and field probe measurements (vector data) arise from errors in converting point clouds to gridded surface models and from geolocation errors in both sets of data. The probe measurements, which use a WAAS-corrected GPS, have a positional uncertainty of ± 2.5 m and a quasi-random vertical depth uncertainty ranging from 0 to 0.05 m caused by a tendency to ‘over-probe’ down into the substrate below the snow (Sturm and Holmgren, 2018). The DEMs and DSMs have a position uncertainty estimated to be ± 0.30 m (Nolan et al., 2015), resulting in snow depth pixel locations accurate to about ±0.40 m. Without correcting either pixel or probe positions, we overlaid and differenced the two measurement sets for each swath and survey (Figure 5; see also Deems et al., 2013). Mean differences between probe and snow depth map values ranged from -0.06 to 0.40 m (Table 2). These offsets arise from the combination of positional and vertical errors, as well as noise in the GPS signals that accumulates over the course of the airborne surveys. As described by Nolan et al., (2015), we applied a global affine transformation to reduce the mean difference (probe minus snow depth map) value for each survey to zero. Once adjusted, the resulting snow depth maps are accurate to about ±0.10 m, which with respect to delineating drifts (which are 10X deeper) is insignificant. The resulting accuracy of the snow depth maps is comparable to that of other airborne snow depth mapping efforts (e.g. Deems et al., 2013; Buhler et al., 2015a; Nolan et al., 2015; Vander Jagt et al., 2015; De Michele at al., 2016; Buhler et al., 2016; Harder et al., 2016).

###### *Figure 5: The 2015 field validation campaign for the CLPX swath was typical. Over eight thousand ground measurements (black circles) were used to validate and adjust the final snow depth map (Table 2). Note the many cutbank, lake drifts conjugate scour zones in the eastern end of the swath.*

###### Table 2. Field Depths (Vector) Minus Snow Depth Maps (Raster) Prior to Correction, All Years.

## Results

### A General Snowdrift Census

To conduct a snowdrift census, we had to define a drift in a manner that could be automated and allowed for inter-annual variability. There is general agreement that a drift is an area where there has been an additional accumulation of snow deposited by the wind (T), but how much, and how can we be sure that the greater accumulation is actually a function of T rather than P? Researchers routinely recognize drifts in the field1, but that identification relies on layers of spatial and visual information including geometry (like recognizing a cornice lip), snow texture, and shadowing, all factors difficult to derive from remote sensing products in an automated fashion.

After a number of trials, we found that we could adequately define a drift in an area of interest (AOI) through the interaction of two functions: F1 - the percentage of the AOI covered by drifts (%DA), and F2 - the percentage of total snow volume in the AOI contained in the drifts (%DV). Using these functions, a depth threshold could be identified and all areas deeper than the threshold assumed to be drifts. To illustrate the procedure consider an AOI with normal snow depth distribution with a mean (μ) of 0.50 m and a standard deviation (σ) of 0.20 m (Figure 6).

###### *Figure 6: Setting the drift depth threshold using depth and volume cumulative distribution curves.*

When the drift threshold for this AOI is set at zero, 100% of the AOI is classified as drift, and all the snow volume is stockpiled in drifts as well, a nonsensical result. As the threshold increases in depth, both %DA and %DV decrease as expected, but at different rates, so the difference between the two functions increases.  For this synthetic example, that difference reaches a maximum at the mean depth (0.5 m) and then begins to fall. The rate at which the %DV-%DA difference changes (the derivative of the F2-F1 difference function) has two inflection points, the second at 0.70 m, and it is here we set the drift threshold (top, Figure 6). In this normally-distributed example, the threshold is exactly 1σ greater than the mean depth, though in real AOIs F1 and F2 are more complex and the threshold value is not simply 1σ above the AOI mean. It is encouraging to note, however, that prior to using this dual function approach, we actually used (μ+1σ) as our informal threshold-setting rubric. For real data, AOIs must be large enough to encompass the full range of measured snow depths, both drifts and scour, and the F1 and F2 functions have to be numerically differentiated.

We applied the drift definition to each of the 12 snow depth maps from the CLPX and HV swaths (Table 2), producing binary drift/no-drift maps for each swath and year. From these we were then able to derive census statistics  (Table 3). On average 14.5% of the area (both swaths) was covered by drifts, and these drift areas contained 30.1% of the snow by volume. Drift snow density in the study area exceeds 0.40 g/cm3 (Tabler, 1980; Sturm et al., 2001), while non-drift density varies between 0.25 to 0.35 g/cm3, so conservatively, we compute that more than 40% of the snow mass in the study area was contained in drifts.

We applied the drift definition to each of the 12 snow depth maps from the CLPX and HV swaths (Table 2), producing binary drift/no-drift maps for each swath and year. From these we were then able to derive census statistics  (Table 3). On average 14.5% of the area (both swaths) was covered by drifts, and these drift areas contained 30.1% of the snow by volume. Drift snow density in the study area exceeds 0.40 g/cm3 (Tabler, 1980; Sturm et al., 2001), while non-drift density varies between 0.25 to 0.35 g/cm3, so conservatively, we compute that more than 40% of the snow mass in the study area was contained in drifts.

###### Table 3. General Drift Census, CLPX and HV Swaths.



